[Music]
so here are some
important utilities that could
help you in improving your productivity
and these are quite extensive so we will
actually have some demo where we can
see more details find is one utility
which helps you in locating files and
processing those files which are
satisfying the conditions that you gave
for the searching
tar and gzip are
tools which are useful for packaging
collections of files
and make is a utility to have
conditional actions performed
actually make is meant for
conditional compilation of source codes
but it's a very generic tool
so it need not be limited to compilation
of source codes like c or c plus plus or
fortron but actually to do any other
action also so you can think of it as
yet another way of writing a script
that would work on the command prompt
the syntax of find command is very
simple after the find you need to give
a list of path names followed by the
conditions typical conditions are listed
here so minus name followed by a pattern
to match the file names so the pattern
can be like what the bash would expect
so with a star or
wild characters that are interpreted by
bash
then minus type
is a condition where you could actually
tell what type of a file are you looking
for and the code is c for character file
deeper directory l for symbolic link
etcetera
minus a time
is a condition to check
how many days back
was the file accessed so was it like
plus 30 that means more than 30 days
back
or minus 30 less than 30 days
so this is useful in finding out what
are the recently accessed files or what
are the one of the oldest
files
touched
in the system
minus c time is very similar to minus a
time except that the files that are
being searched
are looked at when they were
modified rather than just nearly
accessed
minus reg x is also a condition where
you could give a regular expression by
also mentioning what type of a regular
expression are you using posix basic or
posix e-grip etc so that the file names
using the
complete path name can be looked at
in a very powerful manner
minus exec
is an extremely useful
condition where you can follow it up
with a command
and in the command you could use the two
braces
as the placeholder for the file name
which has been searched by the find
command
minus print is a condition where there
is no value that is applied after that
and what it does is just merely to print
the file name which has matched the
pattern that you are searching for
we need to package files for multiple
reasons
so if you have many sub directories and
directories under them etcetera so
actions like copying the directory
across or
looking through those directories for
some specific file etc would be very
slow so very deep file hierarchies are
not recommended
and in situations where
such hierarchies are present but you
don't need them immediately it's a good
idea to
convert the entire file hierarchy into a
single file
and then store it as a package
so tar file
tar is a
command tape archive which can be used
to convert a file or
file hierarchy into a
single
tar file
sometimes when you have a very large
number of tiny files each file would
occupy the minimum block size that is
recommended
or required for the file system so there
is a wastage of space
so in such situations also simply
starring a whole bunch of tiny files
would actually save some disk space for
you
and gzip is a compressing utility to
reduce the
file occupancy of the tar file or any
other large file in your file system
and where do we
use these tools we have the applications
of these tools like tar and gzip in
situations where we take backup when we
want to share a file across the internet
or just simply to reduce the disk
utilization of
the files in our directory
now there are multiple possibilities
that are available for you to just
simply club all files into a single file
and the tar is one of the options tape
rk but zip is also another option
zip would actually also compress the
files while it is actually pulling them
together
and if you are having a file either a
tape archive file or any other file that
is large in size you could reduce its
size by many utilities
compress gzip dzip to xz 7z are the
tools that are useful in reducing the
size of a file
particularly if you have ascii files
plain text files they can be compressed
to
a very good ratio almost like 1 is to 10
if
the file contains many repeating
patterns
now in the brackets i have given the
package names which
would let you have those tools installed
on your system
and very often
when you have a huge set of files
bundled together as a tar file and then
after that you gzip it to reduce the
size and then give it to someone
the other user when they unzip it the
tar file would be still very big for
them before they
expand it to
the respective file hierarchy
so you can actually have a possibility
of
zipping the files while adding into the
tar file
and so
dot tgz file format
that is
combining tar as well as gzip together
is also a very good option
and which of the utilities 7z or zip2 or
gzip which of these utilities should i
use
so the decision is made by looking at
how much time does it take to compress
the file and how much of memory is
required to do that particular
compression and also how much time and
memory are required to expand it
so very often compress
does the job very fast but the
compression ratio is not great
gzip is a very
sweet
intermediary
bzip2 would do a very good job of
compressing by giving a very good ratio
but then it would occupy more space and
take little more time to do the job
and there are also other utilities to do
the same thing of
bundling the files together like rar
format which is popular in windows
ecosystem
but it's a good idea to use
those tools which are having some
portability so the tools i am mentioning
here are open source tools available for
all platforms so if you use these tools
for
the bundling of files and compressing
them then you can uncompress and
unbundle those files quite easily
because the tools are open source and
freely available
and it's also useful to learn how to
stamp a
date and time as well as the process id
along with a tar file for backup so that
unique file names are available when you
are backing up some important pieces of
information from your system
at regular intervals
make is a utility originally meant for
compilation
and you can actually create a script
and
pass it on as an option to the make
using the minus f option
and it would actually do certain actions
for you apart from compiling the source
codes it can also do some actions for
you
so the most important syntax that you
must know is that there is a target
colon prerequisites and below that with
a
indent the recipe of action that has to
be taken so that is the most important
piece of
information that has to be in the make
file
and here is an example
script which we would actually try out
on the command line as a demonstration
make files can be used to
do conditional
running of a script
which is slightly powerful feature
compared to just a plain bash script
so let us explore these on the
command prompt once
so now let us look at the
find
command so the find
help man page is available so it's quite
long
and there are some examples also given
here so you could look at them
okay
so the simplest way of running is
find and then the path name which is the
home directory
and an action which is like print the
file names
so what it does is just looks at the
entire home directory
and every file that is found it will
just print out the file name
so you can actually find out how many
files are there in the home directory
simply by using this command
so in my home directory i have 70 000
files of course you may be wondering how
come i have so many files most of them
are actually cache files from the
browser
and other utilities that are running
now let us say
what are the files that were modified in
the last two days
which require me to
basically take it back for example so i
can
so here is a command where
in the home directory files that were
modified in the last two days
are being printed out
so obviously the cache folder will also
be there
but you also see that there are a bunch
of other files that are being reported
so i go to the documents folder
and
run the command to find out what all the
files that are
modified in the last two days
and this is a small folder so i have
limited number of files that will be
listed and here are the files that are
there
and i go to my home directory
and i can say how many files are
modified
more than a month back
and you can see that
obviously some cache files also listed
but there are a bunch of other files
that are also there
which actually tell me that there are
some files that i have not
looked at the last one month
some more examples let us say there are
some man pages that are available in the
user directory and i want to know where
are those directories kept
so let us try that out
find slash user so go to the slash user
directory and
minus type d that means find out
those files of the type directory
and the name should be
man star so the name should contain the
pattern man after that anything else can
be followed
and what should i do i should just print
out those director names onto the screen
so this is a command so find command
actually
goes through the entire directory
hierarchy
and then looks at the options that we
have given to see what are the matching
or suitable
files of the type that we are asking and
the name that we are asking and then
print them out
so as it is going through it may take
some time because of the depth of the
hierarchy that is available
and you see that it already started
to give the
output
so here you see that the man
manual page directories are all here
user share man and then man want to
manage there are the different sections
of the man page that are being listed of
course there are also other
directories being listed which are
having the word man as a part of them
okay so what i could also now do is
instead of star i can put a question
mark so that only one character has to
be there after man
and you now see that it is a slightly
lesser list because it has only
one character after man that we are
trying to match
so you can look for directories as well
as for files
now let us say
um we want to look at what are the files
that are larger than a particular limit
so i want to see what files are more
than 100 mb for example
and i want to print them out to see
whether i need to move them out or
compress them to save some disk space
and so on
so here what we are doing is
in the current directory my home
directory i am looking at files which
are greater than 10 megabytes and i want
to just print them out
so i have lot of that files now just
merely printing them doesn't help me
because i don't know the individual
sizes so what i would do is i would like
to execute a code on them
and the execution of the code should be
ls minus l
s and h so that the human readable size
of the file should be listed along with
the file name and it's a long listing
and what is the file name i'm using the
paste placeholder which is the braces
side by side and i need to close the
line execution line so i escape the
semicolon
because that is interpreted by shell in
a different manner so i just pass it on
only to the find command that way
okay so what will happen is that every
file that is matching the condition of
being greater than 10 megabytes
that file name will be inserted at the
place that i am indicating here and the
command that is listed here will be
executed which is basically ls minus
lssh file name so you know what the
output would look like
so the output would have
the file size in a humidity form
followed by the long listing
so you now see that we are able to look
at the file sizes of all those which are
larger than 10 me
10 megabytes so we can then go to 100
megabytes and look at the large files so
it seems that i have
very large number of files that are also
very big
so i go for 500 maybe 200
okay so i still have large number of
files that are
so huge so these are all basically the
videos i have prepared for this very
course and i can now see if some of them
need to be compressed so
i can go on to compress and see whether
i can save some space i could also
look for a
particular type of a file and then
do an action so
every jpeg file for example i want to
just see whether
any any of those are large in size
so what this command does is in the
current directory it will go on to look
for all the files which have a pattern
of the name star.jpg and then on them it
will execute the command
ls
less minus
sh
and then the pattern
so you can see all the jpeg files are
listed and their size is given in a
human readable fashion here
and
so if i see that some of them are too
big and i want to
do something to them like reduce the
number of pixels etcetera i can do that
so you could actually use the find
utility to identify the type of files
that you want to work on them so exec is
a very powerful
option on them and the syntax here
is very specific so you have to escape
the
semicolon
and remember that this will be executed
on every file that matches the
particular
pattern that we gave
so you could also move those files to a
different place using the execute
command but you know that those actions
are
quite serious and so
use them as
you deem
necessary for your
directory now to illustrate the
compression capability etc let me
get a copy of the
log folders because
that is something that i can try out
so
copy minus r
where
log
to a folder called
log files
so there are some files that i am not
supposed to be having permission to read
so nevertheless the rest of them are
available
so you see that a bunch of
files have come
so these are all the log files that have
come
and i can find out how much size it
occupies 450 megabytes of size okay
and
minus lr will give me recursively and i
can see that lot of
depth is there here
so what i can do is
star
so first let me just see
so it is occupying 450 megabytes so what
i will do is star minus evf
log file start tar
so
here what i'm doing is i'm creating a
bundle of all the files which are in the
directory called log files
and i'm naming the bundle as
logfiles.tar
okay
so it is now bundling
and
that bundle if you see here
it has roughly the same size you know
it's it's almost the same size
so 400
megabits but 10 megabytes more because
it has to have the information about
those files
in which sequence it is
keeping in the particular tab archive
file
now i can compress this and see how much
it can come down
so you see now the file has been shrunk
from 460 megabytes to 23 megabytes
that's the ratio of almost one is to 20.
and that is because the log files are
mainly text files and they have very
repetitive kind of pattern inside them
and therefore i can actually keep the
entire log file directory with
just about five percent of the
size that would occupy otherwise okay
now let us look at the efficiency of
compression with other utilities also
so i would unzip
that
so it is 460 megabytes
so now i will zip it using
another utility bzip2
as you can make out it takes a little
more time than
gzip
and it has shrunk it to 16 megabytes
instead of 23 megabytes which means that
the bzip2 is slightly more efficient in
shrinking but it takes more time to
shrink it
now that is a
balance that you need to pick okay so if
you are desperate and you have enough
ram that this compression process can
finish in reasonable time you can
actually shrink it to the maximum
possible using bzip2
but if you are
having limited resources then gzip is
pretty good now there is some other
utility which also takes a little less
time so that is called compress
i am unzipping the
file so that i can try another algorithm
so compress
so you see that the compress has done
quite fast but it has shrunk it to only
45 megabytes so you can see that
compress is very fast but it shrinks
not so much
bzip2 is a bit slow but it shrinks very
well
and gzip is something in between okay so
you have to choose what you like to use
for a particular application but in any
case
for a directory which has a lot of sub
directories and lot of small files it's
always a good idea to package those as a
tar file if you don't need those files
regularly so whenever you need them you
can always enter the file and start
using them again so how do i do that
so the directory is log file is already
there so i remove that
so now you see that the directory is not
there so i would
uncompress
and tar minus
f
and now the directory is back
okay
so you see that we are able to unzip and
antar
the
archive files quite quickly so it's a
very good idea to invest some time in
mastering this particular utility which
could save you a lot of
space
and also effort in transferring files
across systems
if you have large number of them in a
very deep hierarchy of file system
the make utility is also useful as a
shell script extension for some
maintenance activities as i mentioned to
you it is actually mentor
meant for conditional compilation of
source codes but
let us
use it for also other purposes
so the man page is quite extensive you
can read through that
and
an example of that is available
so here is an example i have created so
what it does is
a variable has been created
which
has the value of the directory which
is the destination for keeping the
backup
and then i am storing the date time
stamp
by using a shell command so that
it's actually stored in a variable
now
this colon in front of the equal to
is like you know a one time substitution
of this particular variable whereas if
you have equal to
then that means that every time this
particular variable is occurring the
substitution is performed it's a small
difference between those two usages in
make syntax
and the name of the tar file is being
given here as backup underscore the
stamp dot tar okay and what am i backing
up i am backing up two files file one
and file two
and the actions are all listed here
where i am displaying a text saying i am
backing up the files
and then i am making a tar file
and then i am looking at the size of the
tar file and then i am moving it to the
backup directory so let me make up
make a directory for backup so the
directory is available and the files
that i need to backup are also to be
created so let me create them using the
touch
file 1
file 2
and there is nothing in them yet so what
i would do
is
copy
in the log file so there are some
contents that i could copy across so
dmesg
so let me see the size of it so that's
pretty large okay so
copy that to file1
and also 5 2
okay so now i have got file 1 and file 2
that are there and make 1. so
make
backup okay so when i run like that what
it would do is
it would actually look at a file called
make file that is available and in that
make file what are the commands
available one of the targets is to be
written as backup and it will try to
perform that particular action what is
given below it with an indentation but
we do not have a file called make file
so we need to tell that file
saying that it's the commands are all
actually make dot file not in make file
with a capital m
so
when we run that
what it does is
it would actually backup those two files
to a
directory
called backup under the home directory
and as a tar file
so let us look at the contents of the
backup directory and you can see that
it has a tar file
which contains a date time stamp and it
contains the two files that we have just
now wanted to backup now this is a very
nice utility because every time you run
it would actually change the file name
so
what's the date so you can see that now
the time is different
so let us go ahead and
try that again
uh
make file would
perform actions only when the target
files have changed so i have already
backed up the file one and file too they
have not changed so the backup need not
be performed so what i will do is
i would
append some text to the file one so that
the file name has changed file content
has changed
so now if i try to
make the backup it would actually do it
because one of the files has changed
so this is a powerful feature of make
where one of the dependencies has
changed only then the action is
performed
which is actually something that we
don't need to worry
in a way script
because that is automatically performed
by the make utility
so look at the directory
now you have got the two backup folders
and
these are at
with the two different names because we
have run them at two different instances
of time so you can actually use the make
utility for
such actions
as cleaning up
the directory of temporary files
or zipping things that you don't want to
occupy the file system with and so on
any maintenance activity can also be
taken up as a make file command